README.md, before:

# Ansible Collection - lab.azure_deployment

This is a collection that will deploy Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform on Microsoft Azure.
While this collection will work with any Ansible deployment on Azure, this is intended to be a starting point for customers that purchase Ansible Automation Platform subscriptions from the Azure marketplace.
Take this collection and enhance/improve/update based on the resources that you need for your AAP deployment.

**NOTE :** It is assumed that only one dedicated resource group will be made, used, and deleted by the playbooks and roles in this repository.

## Introduction

This collection performs the following actions in the order listed.
There are variables that can be used to skip or prevent steps by setting variables, which are covered later in this document.

| Step | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| Create a deployment ID | Creates a random string that will be used in tagging for correlating the resources used with a deployment of AAP. |
| Merge tags | Merges customer provided tags with the default ones. |
| Create a resource group | Creates a resource group to contain all of the related resources for the AAP installation. |
| Create a virtual network | Creates a virtual network with a CIDR block that can contain the subnets that will be created. |
| Create subnets | Creates the subnets for automation controller, execution environments, private automation hub, and Event-Driven Ansible. |
| Create the private DNS zone | Creates the private DNS zone for PostgreSQL. |
| Create a network security group | Creates a security group that allows AAP ports within the VNET and HTTPS and automation mesh ports externally. |
| Create a database server | Creates a PostgreSQL Flexible Server and the necessary databases inside of it for the controller, hub, and Event-Driven Ansible components. |
| Create the controller VMs | Creates VMs for controller, a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the controller LB | Creates the Load Balancer (Application Gateway) for the controller VMs. |
| Create the execution nodes VMs | Creates VMs for execution nodes (if enabled), a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the hub VMs | Creates VMs for private automation hub, a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the Event-Driven Ansible VMs | Creates VMs for Event-Driven Ansible (if enabled), a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Register the VMs with Red Hat | Uses RHEL subscription manager to register each virtual machine for required RPM repos. |
| Update the VMs | Updates each VM deployed with latest kernel and packages. |
| Setup one controller VM as the installer | Configures the installer VMs with a private SSH key so that it can communicate with the other VMs that are part of the installation process and configures the installer inventory file based on the VMs that were created as part of this process. |

## Getting Started

These sections will describe required or recommended steps so that your Ansible Automation Platform deployment is as seamless as possible.

### This Collection

Install the collection directly from the `ansible-galaxy` CLI tool.
Examples in this readme assume that you have done this.

```bash
ansible-galaxy collection install git+https://github.com/ansible-content-lab/azure_ansible_deployment.git
```

You may also download the collection from GitHub and modify to suit your needs.

### Roles

This collection includes the following roles.
Each role has default variables and required variables.
Review the default variables files to view all of the options that may be set.

| Role | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| `lab.azure_deployment.infrastructure` | Responsible for deploying the Azure infrastructure. |

### Azure Credentials

The Azure collection used as a dependency requires Azure credentials, which can be set in different places, such as the `~/.azure/credentials` file above, through environment variables, or the Azure CLI profile.
The easiest, and most portable, approach will be to set the following env vars.

- `AZURE_CLIENT_ID`
- `AZURE_SECRET`
- `AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID`
- `AZURE_TENANT`

The playbooks included in this collection will need a way to connect to the virtual machines that it creates.
By default, VMs are created with public IP addresses to make this simple, but the collection may be modified to use private IP addresses if your local machine can route traffic to private networks.

## Deploying Ansible Automation Platform

This section will walk through deploying the Azure infrastructure and Ansible Automation Platform.

### Checklist

- [ ] Install this collection (or download and modify)
- [ ] Ansible CLI tools installed locally (`ansible`)
    **NOTE**: On Mac, use `pip` installed Ansible.  We have seen problems when trying to use `brew` installed Ansible.
- [ ] Configure the Azure environment variables for authentication
- [ ] Ensure you don't have anything else in the resource group that you use (default of specified via an extra var)

### Running the Playbook

The variables below are required for running the playbook

| Variable | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `aap_red_hat_username` | This is your Red Hat account name that will be used for Subscription Management (https://access.redhat.com/management). |
| `aap_red_hat_password` | The Red Hat account password. |
| `infrastructure_database_server_user` | Username that will be the admin of the new database server. |
| `infrastructure_database_server_password` | Password of the admin of the new database server. |
| `aap_admin_password` | The admin password to create for Ansible Automation Platform application. |

Additional variables can be found in playbooks/group_vars/all.yml and roles/infrastructure/default/main.yml.

Assuming that all variables are configured properly and your Azure account has permissions to deploy the resources defined in this collection, then running the playbook should be a single task. For example:

```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.deploy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD infrastructure_database_server_user=example_user infrastructure_database_server_password=example_database_server_password
aap_admin_password=example_aap_admin_password"
```

### Load Balancer (Application Gateway)

By default, no LB is created for the controller VMs.
Set `infrastructure_create_controller_lb` to `true` to create the LB.
There needs to be more than one controller VM for the LB to be created as well.
By default, the LB is created with a HTTPS listener that will need a PFX password-protected certificate to be provided.
Set `infrastructure_cert_path` to the path of the certificate to use.
If an LB is deployed and a certificate is provided, a password needs to be specified while running the collection.
For example:
```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.deploy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD infrastructure_database_server_user=example_user infrastructure_database_server_password=example_password infrastructure_create_controller_lb=true infrastructure_cert_path=/path/to/cert infrastructure_certificate_password=example_password"

### Installing Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform

At this point you can ssh into one of the controller nodes and run the installer.
We provided a sample inventory that could be used to deploy AAP.
You might need to edit the inventory to fit your needs.

```bash
$ cd /opt/ansible-automation-platform/installer/
$ sudo ./setup.sh -i inventory_azure
```

For more information, read the install guide from https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_ansible_automation_platform/

## Uninstall

The `destroy_infrastructure` playbook will remove RHEL subscription entitlements and deprovision the infrastructure that has been deployed in the given resource group.
This will permanently remove all data and infrastructure in the resource group, so only run this playbook if you are sure that you want to delete all traces of the deployment.

The variables below are required for running the playbook

| Variable | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `aap_red_hat_username` | This is your Red Hat account name that will be used for Subscription Management (https://access.redhat.com/management). |
| `aap_red_hat_password` | The Red Hat account password. |

```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.destroy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD"
```

Commit message:

443 as the backend target and update README

README.md, after:

# Ansible Collection - lab.azure_deployment

This is a collection that will deploy Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform on Microsoft Azure.
While this collection will work with any Ansible deployment on Azure, this is intended to be a starting point for customers that purchase Ansible Automation Platform subscriptions from the Azure marketplace.
Take this collection and enhance/improve/update based on the resources that you need for your AAP deployment.

**NOTE :** It is assumed that only one dedicated resource group will be made, used, and deleted by the playbooks and roles in this repository.

## Introduction

This collection performs the following actions in the order listed.
There are variables that can be used to skip or prevent steps by setting variables, which are covered later in this document.

| Step | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| Create a deployment ID | Creates a random string that will be used in tagging for correlating the resources used with a deployment of AAP. |
| Merge tags | Merges customer provided tags with the default ones. |
| Create a resource group | Creates a resource group to contain all of the related resources for the AAP installation. |
| Create a virtual network | Creates a virtual network with a CIDR block that can contain the subnets that will be created. |
| Create subnets | Creates the subnets for automation controller, execution environments, private automation hub, and Event-Driven Ansible. |
| Create the private DNS zone | Creates the private DNS zone for PostgreSQL. |
| Create a network security group | Creates a security group that allows AAP ports within the VNET and HTTPS and automation mesh ports externally. |
| Create a database server | Creates a PostgreSQL Flexible Server and the necessary databases inside of it for the controller, hub, and Event-Driven Ansible components. |
| Create the controller VMs | Creates VMs for controller, a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the controller LB | Creates the Load Balancer (Application Gateway) for the controller VMs. |
| Create the execution nodes VMs | Creates VMs for execution nodes (if enabled), a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the hub VMs | Creates VMs for private automation hub, a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Create the Event-Driven Ansible VMs | Creates VMs for Event-Driven Ansible (if enabled), a public IP, and the virtual network interface card with the public IP attached. |
| Register the VMs with Red Hat | Uses RHEL subscription manager to register each virtual machine for required RPM repos. |
| Update the VMs | Updates each VM deployed with latest kernel and packages. |
| Setup one controller VM as the installer | Configures the installer VMs with a private SSH key so that it can communicate with the other VMs that are part of the installation process and configures the installer inventory file based on the VMs that were created as part of this process. |

## Getting Started

These sections will describe required or recommended steps so that your Ansible Automation Platform deployment is as seamless as possible.

### This Collection

Install the collection directly from the `ansible-galaxy` CLI tool.
Examples in this readme assume that you have done this.

```bash
ansible-galaxy collection install git+https://github.com/ansible-content-lab/azure_ansible_deployment.git
```

You may also download the collection from GitHub and modify to suit your needs.

### Roles

This collection includes the following roles.
Each role has default variables and required variables.
Review the default variables files to view all of the options that may be set.

| Role | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| `lab.azure_deployment.infrastructure` | Responsible for deploying the Azure infrastructure. |

### Azure Credentials

The Azure collection used as a dependency requires Azure credentials, which can be set in different places, such as the `~/.azure/credentials` file above, through environment variables, or the Azure CLI profile.
The easiest, and most portable, approach will be to set the following env vars.

- `AZURE_CLIENT_ID`
- `AZURE_SECRET`
- `AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID`
- `AZURE_TENANT`

The playbooks included in this collection will need a way to connect to the virtual machines that it creates.
By default, VMs are created with public IP addresses to make this simple, but the collection may be modified to use private IP addresses if your local machine can route traffic to private networks.

## Deploying Ansible Automation Platform

This section will walk through deploying the Azure infrastructure and Ansible Automation Platform.

### Checklist

- [ ] Install this collection (or download and modify)
- [ ] Ansible CLI tools installed locally (`ansible`)
    **NOTE**: On Mac, use `pip` installed Ansible.  We have seen problems when trying to use `brew` installed Ansible.
- [ ] Configure the Azure environment variables for authentication
- [ ] Ensure you don't have anything else in the resource group that you use (default of specified via an extra var)

### Running the Playbook

The variables below are required for running the playbook

| Variable | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `aap_red_hat_username` | This is your Red Hat account name that will be used for Subscription Management (https://access.redhat.com/management). |
| `aap_red_hat_password` | The Red Hat account password. |
| `infrastructure_database_server_user` | Username that will be the admin of the new database server. |
| `infrastructure_database_server_password` | Password of the admin of the new database server. |
| `aap_admin_password` | The admin password to create for Ansible Automation Platform application. |

Additional variables can be found in playbooks/group_vars/all.yml and roles/infrastructure/default/main.yml.

Assuming that all variables are configured properly and your Azure account has permissions to deploy the resources defined in this collection, then running the playbook should be a single task. For example:

```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.deploy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD infrastructure_database_server_user=example_user infrastructure_database_server_password=example_database_server_password
aap_admin_password=example_aap_admin_password"
```

### Load Balancer (Application Gateway)

By default, no LB is created for the controller VMs.
Set `infrastructure_create_controller_lb` to `true` to create the LB.
There needs to be more than one controller VM for the LB to be created as well.

By default, the LB is created with a HTTPS listener that will need a PFX password-protected certificate to be provided.
Set `infrastructure_cert_path` to the path of the certificate to use.
If an LB is deployed and a certificate is provided, a password needs to be specified while running the collection.

For example:

```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.deploy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD infrastructure_database_server_user=example_user infrastructure_database_server_password=example_password infrastructure_certificate_password=example_password"
```

Once all the infrastructure is deployed, the LB backend VM targets will look unhealthy because AAP is not yet installed and additional actions need to be performed on the LB itself.

Once AAP has been installed, a self-signed certificate will be issued as part of the defualt installation. The CA used during the installation needs to be configured within the LB to validate the HTTPS/443 connectivity between the LB and the backend VMs.
For that we'll need to grab the CA from the VM where we have initiated the AAP installation and grab the contents of `/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/ansible-automation-platform-managed-ca-cert.crt` and save that into a `.CER` file. Once we're done, we'll need to go to the `Application Gateway deployed > Backend settings > click on the existing backend settings > Click on 'No' on the "Backend server’s certificate is issued by a well-known CA"` and add the `.CER` file that we just saved. Once that is done, the Application Gateway address should be able to reach the AAP on the backend VMs.


### Installing Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform

At this point you can ssh into one of the controller nodes and run the installer.
We provided a sample inventory that could be used to deploy AAP.
You might need to edit the inventory to fit your needs.

```bash
$ cd /opt/ansible-automation-platform/installer/
$ sudo ./setup.sh -i inventory_azure
```

For more information, read the install guide from https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_ansible_automation_platform/

## Uninstall

The `destroy_infrastructure` playbook will remove RHEL subscription entitlements and deprovision the infrastructure that has been deployed in the given resource group.
This will permanently remove all data and infrastructure in the resource group, so only run this playbook if you are sure that you want to delete all traces of the deployment.

The variables below are required for running the playbook

| Variable | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `aap_red_hat_username` | This is your Red Hat account name that will be used for Subscription Management (https://access.redhat.com/management). |
| `aap_red_hat_password` | The Red Hat account password. |

```bash
ansible-playbook lab.azure_deployment.destroy_infrastructure --extra-vars "aap_red_hat_username=$RED_HAT_ACCOUNT aap_red_hat_password=$RED_HAT_PASSWORD"
```
